So the 5th the first thing I want you
to know is that the lectures aren't
and lab lab assignment is already up.
Uh, yesterday. And, uh, you can find
the lecture assignment in this path.
I mean in the Blackboard Lecture.
And, uh. In this folder,
lecture 2 numbering system and you can
find the lab assignment in the left part of
the in the left panel of the Blackboard.
You can see labs and then in this folder you
can find the manual for the lab assignment.
One thing is that, uh.
About the lecture assignment?
Uh, if you have the option to
select two questions to answer,
you will see a lot of other
questions that may not be covered
during this week or next week,
so you can select those that.
You can answer the question based
on the topics we covered this week.
Uh, But the remaining question
is just for your information,
because later during the
midterm exam or final exam,
those are sample questions
that you may see in the exam.
Or as we said, I mean the number of the uh,
assignments are based on the number of weeks,
so we are in the second week.
So we have Lab 2 and lecture
2 in the first week.
We didn't have any assignments.
So these are the first assignments for you.
So this is a very quick recap
of what we said last week.
Uhm, so basically we said that
we are going to solve problems.
Uh, among the very few
problems are can be solvable,
or we can find a solution,
and among them are measuring the distance,
height or length. In order to do.
To solve the problem regarding
measuring distance or height,
we say that we have to first see
what is the property of the entity
that we are going to measure.
If it is continuous,
we have to break it down into discrete units.
If it is already discrete,
there is no need for that and then we
have to represent these discrete units
by some numbers or numerals or digits.
This whole process is called quantization.
And that's the birth of systems
are called discrete systems,
meaning that the system that can
analyze or process discrete units
of or discrete units of entities.
So just one quick reminder.
You may have heard about digital systems.
Basically, this is the the name of the
book that is a reference for this course.
You can call.
This is the verse of digital system as well.
Because these systems are designed
to work with digits or numbers.
But nature will see that the
term digital system is referred
specifically to a specific type of
systems that we will discuss that.
But in general aspect in abstract definition.
Hand called these systems
that work with numbers,
discrete systems or digital systems.
Uh, the first system that we
discussed was the unary system.
Basically the digit or the
number was just one element one,
and if we need to count more than one unit,
we have to repeat that.
We have to add more position
and repeat that position.
And based on that,
we see that in order to just represent the
distance of Moon to the sun, we need 4.
Letter size pages.
In order to repeat all the 12,000 units
of Earth in order to reach to the Sun.
So you see that this unary
system is not a space efficient,
meaning that it needs a lot of
space or position to represent
just one number 12,000.
During the history we said that
there are a lot of improvement
toward the other systems.
Uh, these systems are called
numbering systems or number systems.
And we said that from the very
beginning that where we only had one
digit later they add more digits
and this is the turning point in
design of number system introducing
the number 0 to represent nothing.
And then gradually within the history
we can see that in the Eastern
countries we had these numerals in the
Western countries we had these numerals,
and then at the end of the day,
right now we have the modern
numbering system.
Right now at the decimal system that
has 10 digits from 01 up until 9.
All. We discussed building or creating
numbering system is not that difficult,
so I introduced my own number system that
has only four numerals or digits 0123.
And then when we want to represent four,
we said that we don't have the digit for 4.
Instead we can introduce a new position to
the left or right side and then keep track
of the loops that we did over the digits.
Based on this I mean Hossein number system.
We could reduce the four
pages to just one pages.
So we keep track of all the routes
that we go over the digits and this
way we can represent large numbers.
So for 12,000 based on the formula
for Hossein number system we need
3000 position and if we have a letter
letter of site that has 3000 positions,
we need one page.
We could say that Hossein  number system
is a more powerful or better number
system compared to other system.
Then we said that a better number
system would be adding the position
with significance.
So we said that when we are trying
to keep track of the loops that
we go over the digits.
Instead of just keeping track of the,
uh, the steps that we've done so far,
we could keep track of the rounds.
Over the digits.
So for instance, here when we did one round,
we add one new position,
but this new position has
a significance of four.
Because it shows that we did
one round over 4 digits.
And then we represent one,
but this one is different from this one,
because this one represent
one round over 4 digits,
so it has a significance of
four to the power of 1.
And etc.
That was a the Quarternary UM system
or base four or radix 4 little
will see why we call this radix.
But basically,
in this system we have 4 numerals
with digits and the new positions
has the power of four.
The first position has the
power of four to power zero,
the second position 4 to power one and etc.
And that was the formula that we came up.
Uh, so the first position, 2nd and etc.
So if we have this number,
this number is equal to 16 because
we have zero at the significance of.
4 to the power of 0 and then we have
zero in the second position at the
significance of four to the power of
1 and then one at the significance
of four to the power of two.
So you sum them and it becomes 16.
And this is the formula.
Basically base four to decimal system
is just multiplying each digit opposite
position to the significance of that
position and then sum them together.
Then we compare this new system base
four with the Hossein system and we said that.
For numbering system in Hossein System,
there are some numbers that are not valid,
but there are valid in base 4.
Also, given a specific
number of positions here,
for instance 10 position.
The maximum number that we can
represent in base 4 is huge.
I mean much larger than
Hossein numbering system,
and the reason was that because when
we introduce a new position in base 4,
the significance are based
on the powers of four.
But in Jose system is just a multiply by 4.
So powers of four or multiplication by
4 so definitely base four is better.
The wide range of numbers it can
represent in this in this system.
Then we calculate the base-4 minimum,
which basically is that representing
the lowest digit in all positions
and some together, so it becomes 0.
And when we want to see what is the largest
number representing the largest digit in
all positions and then sum them together,
so multiply each digit to the powers
of that position to the significance
of that position.
Which is. Powers of four.
And this is the last position for
the power of n - 1 and we do some.
It becomes the maximum number and
that was the formula.
4 to the power of N.
If you have given N position minus one.
Uh, another important formula was that if
we are given a number and we want to see.
How many position we need to represent
that number in a system like this four,
we could assume that that given number is
the maximum number put into that formula
and then by some calculation the number of
position is equal to the log of that number,
+1 to the base of four. And that way.
In order to represent the distance of Moon
to the Sun based on the units of Earth,
12,000 Earth based on that formula
in these four system we need.
This amount of position, uh?
Position is a discrete unit,
so we do ceiling of that number
and becomes the seventh position.
So you see that less number of position is
needed for representing the same distance,
but by the base 4 system.
So now that we know we can build a.
Numbering system based on introducing
position with with significance.
So if we have base 4.
Is it possible to have base of other
numbers powers of other numbers?
For instance, powers of two
powers of three powers, four?
We already have 5/6 and
other I mean significance.
So the answer is yes,
but some of them are very common,
so today we are going to start with the.
Common numbering systems.
So. The question is that
when we have base four,
why not having base two so in base two?
The numbers or digits are zero and
one as you can see here when we
have base or the number of digits
are up from zero up until r - 1.
So if you have base 2,
the number of digits are between
zero up until 2 - 1, which is 1.
So here we have two digits.
Or base two and if we are given this number
in base two in order to see what is the.
A new value.
What is the decimal equal
number to this base 2 number?
Very same formula.
Each position has a significance,
but in this system the significance
are based on the powers of two.
So this position to the power 2.
2 to the power of 3.
2 to the power of 4.
5. 6.
And then seven.
So we are given eight position
from zero up until seven,
and each position has the
significance of powers of two.
We multiply by this and then sum together.
So this is the. Significance
of the position multiplication
and then sum them together.
So this number is equal
273 in decimal system.
In our normal system.
If we are given this number
30302131. What would be the equal
number in decimal system? So.
Same formula but however we saw already that.
You have to before converting any
number in any bases to decimal system.
You have to first check whether
the digits are valid digits or no.
In Hossein system we already saw
that there would be a number
that is not valid in the system.
Here is the same in base two.
The digits are only between zero and one.
So if you see a digit in a number
that is greater or equal than two.
It's not a valid number in base two because
the base two has digits zero and one only,
so simply you have to say
that it's not a valid number.
So always check before conversion.
We have to check whether the given number
is a valid number in the system or not.
So now if you want to count the units
in base two, what would be the numbers?
If you are given four positions? So.
Later you will see that base two.
You already know that it's the
building block of our computer system,
so it is good to practice a lot
about binary numbers,
at least up until four positions.
In a way that you will at the end of the day,
you have to memorize all these numbers.
But imagine that you just wanted
to start the base two system.
So what would be the numbers?
So the minimum number.
What is the minimum number in
any base or systems?
Simply,
you have to repeat the lowest
digit in all positions.
The lowest digit is 000 in all positions
and then multiply and then sum.
So they add.
You're gonna have 000 at the first.
What would be the last or be maximum number?
In this system.
Correct, so basically you have to repeat
the largest digit in all positions so
the largest digit in base two is 1.
So you repeat one in all positions, so the
largest number in base two is this number.
And also whenever we write a number in any
system, we put the base of that number.
As a subscript to that number.
So what are the numbers in between?
So in order to reach to the next number
you have to add the this number by 1.
So if you add this by one,
so let's do this here.
0000 and then by one.
What is the one one is just one position,
it is one and in all positions we have zero.
And then if you add them you know
the additional algorithm in high
school or primary school so they end.
Number would be 0001 and then the
next is plus this number with.
One, So what would be this 1 + 1 is 2.
2 cannot be represented by the
base two system.
We did one round over all digits.
So what we do is that.
We divide the result by the number of
digits and then we keep the remainder
and we carry on to the next position.
So here the result is 2.
We cannot represent two.
We divided by two. The result gonna be 0.
Sorry one and the remainder gonna be 0.
We keep the remainder and we
put this to the next position.
So at that we have zero and then one here.
So 1 + 0 + 0 becomes one and
then 0 + 0 and etc.
So the next number gonna be 0010.
And etc.
So this way you have to count
and these are the numbers.
Assuming that we reach this number 1011
and we want to see what is the next number.
So before I do the addition,
so let's see the decimal number for this.
So in order to say so,
we have to multiply by zero,
multiply by 1,
multiply by 2 to the power of
two and then 2 to the power of 3.
So this number gonna be 8.
Plus 2 + 1 which is.
11 we are adding eleven by one.
We expect that the result gonna be 12,
but in base two system.
So if you start addition.
So plus 1 + 1 is 2.
We cannot represent two 2 / 2 one round.
One round over all digits and
the remainder is 0,
so we keep the remainder and we
put the carrier here and then
we do the addition here.
So 1 + 1 + 0 becomes two again,
so divided by two.
This is the quotient it's called.
Quotient, and this is the remainder.
We keep the remainder and we put the carry.
So the next position and then 1 + 0 +
0 becomes one and then here one plus.
So now it should represent 12.
So basically this 2 to the power
of 3 multiply
and this 2 to the power of two.
So 8 + 4 which is 12.
So this way you have to do the count up until
the maximum number given four positions.
So I just wanted to write it down for you.
You may sound this may sound,
I mean kind of silly or stupid,
but the reason I'm doing it here is that.
Gradually you have to.
I mean make the numbers in binary,
at least up until four position.
Part of your mind,
such that when you see a binary number,
you know what is the.
I mean, the value in decimal system.
So. I just wanted you can continue
with me with with with a paper at home.
Right now 01. 2. three.
4. 5. 6.
7. Aids.
9.
10 11 12 13
14 and 15. At least the four position of
binary system you have to practice a lot.
So whenever you see this number,
you know what is this number.
So what was the number it was?
Age plus three becomes 11,
so this is 11 in decimal system.
Or whenever you say this.
It's seven in. Decimal system.
So the next common numbering system is.
In between you can have base three.
You can have base four, base,
five, base six, base 7,
but the next comment I'm saying comment
most of the time we use it is called
octal numbering system or base 8.
Basically, in base eight,
the number of digits are from zero.
As you can see here,
up until seven, so or minus one.
So 8 - 1 is 7, so these are the
valid digits that you can use.
And if you are given this number in
base eight very similar procedure,
so each position has this time significance
of based on the powers of eight. So.
Then you have to multiply each digit
to the significance of that position.
And then sum them together.
So this number becomes this.
This number in base eight
becomes this number in base 10.
Again. Always before calculating
the conversion, you have to
check the digits are valid here.
You can see that you have two digits.
8 and A which are not valid
digits in base 8 system and
the most important one is this.
Again the valid digits in its base
or is up until all minus one,
so 8 is not a valid digit in base 8.
So this is the same number we calculated
for base two converted to a decimal system.
So now we want to see what is the
exact number, but in base eight,
if we increase the significance
of the positions,
you can see that this number
is about 2,000,000 something.
But in days two it's just 173.
You see that if you increase
the significance of a position,
you are increasing the value
of a number such that you can
represent larger range of numbers.
You can see here that this is much
more powerful compared to base two
because it can represent larger numbers.
So now if we want to.
karandeep, Please wait will I will stop
at the end of this topic and I
will wait for your questions.
So now if we have a thank you,
if we have if we want to count in octal
system or base eight given four positions.
Again, what would be the minimum number?
What is the starting point if you want
to represent nothing in base eight,
the lowest digit in this system
is again zero.
You have to repeat 0 so 0000.
In Base 8.
The maximum number would be repeating
the largest digit in all positions,
so the largest digit 7 so
7777. So this is the largest.
Digit or number in base 8 correct.
So now what would be the next?
The next is that?
As we already said, in base eight,
we are allowed to open,
move forward up until seven.
So the next is this position gonna
be one and all the other position is
still cannot be used and then two.
And then three.
4. 5.
6. Seven, and now we. Have to use eight,
but we don't have any digit.
for eight you have to go to the
next position so eight becomes
one round over all 8 digits.
So becomes 001 round and then zero.
So you see we move toward the
next significant position.
So this is. 8IN. Octal system what?
What is 9 this number plus one so 0011?
This is 9 in. Uh. Octal system and etc.
So. And here is the range of numbers.
The idea is that at anytime.
You add with one unit of that base,
so if you see this number.
And you want to just move one unit ahead.
You could simply add it with
the number one in that system.
So 7 + 1 becomes 8.
You cannot represent 8
You did one round, so one round goes to the
next position and you keep the remainder.
And then again, 1 + 7 + 0 becomes eight.
8 cannot be represented one round.
You go to the next position
and you keep the remainder.
And then 1 + 2 + 0 becomes three.
It's a valid digit and then
there is no need to move toward.
I mean put the carrier to the
next position and then 5 + 0.
So this is the next number in base 8.
So the next comment, most common
number system is the decimal system.
So far we converted all the numbers in all
these numbers system to decimal system.
So now let's see what is the
decimal system decimal system.
Is based 10 the power of the significance of
the positions are based on the powers of 10,
the number of digits is from zero up
until 9, so 10 - 1 becomes 9. And.
It's interesting that in most cultures,
they figure out that a the most common
or the most convenient numbering
system is for human individual.
That list is the decimal system or base 10.
So these are the evolution of the decimal
system in different cultures, Arabic.
Eastern Arabic a Roman.
So even the Roman number system,
a move forward up until representing 10.
I'm not familiar with these languages,
but definitely if we have
some students in the class,
we can see that these these
are the numerals in Bengali.
Malaysia Thai language and Chinese language.
So you see, I mean, that's the
magic of the base stand that I mean,
human individual prefer to represent.
Or do the processing by decimal
system of base 10.
Yes, actually. Cecelia says
that we have also ten fingers.
That's an interesting
thing that you brought up.
I mean, maybe the reason is that
they use their body part to count,
so we have fingers. So 10 fingers.
That's why it evolves toward the base 10.
That's an interesting, uh, I mean fact.
Thank you, uh, so in base 10 if you
want to convert to the decimal system.
The same algorithm.
So you multiply digitally.
Significance of that position
and you sum together.
So it's evident that you will end up
with the same number that you are given,
so this is the number that you are given,
and this is the final number.
So exactly the same value,
30 million or something.
So because we are converting the
decimal 10 to decimal system,
so decimal number to decimal number.
So now I want to show you that what
is the value of the same number
but this time in decimal system.
If they are given this number that we already
calculated in base two and base eight,
and we want to see what's
the value in base 10,
it would be 10 million something.
So just to compare these numbering system.
The same number.
But in base two is equal to 173,
the same number,
but in base eight is about
2,000,000 something but the same
number in base 10 is 10 million.
So you see,
it increases the range of numbers
that we can represent given
the fixed amount of position.
Uh, so base 10 is much more powerful
than base two and base 10, 8.
But again, whenever you want
to convert, you may count a.
You may see this number again.
We have an invalid digit in base 10,
so, uh, you cannot convert
it to a decimal system.
It's not a valid number.
And I assume that all of you know how
to count the decimal numbers given
four position from zero up until a,
so the minimum number repeating zero,
the largest number is repeating
the largest digit 9999,
and you know how to count toward this 9999
but now I want to show you some weird
number system that they are actually.
They built, they are built for some
purposes or in some cultures they
use kind of different way to count.
So I called them weird numbering systems.
So the, uh, the?
I mean, this is actually the
weird numbering system introduced
by computer computer scientist.
So we call it hexadecimal.
Over base 16 or radix 16.
Basically, in this numbering system,
we're gonna need 16 - 115 digits,
so the digits is start or number
start with 0, 1 up until 9
So we need a digit for the number
10 because we are allowed to use 10,
it's less than 16, but 10 is 10.
It needs two positions.
So instead of this we use.
Alphabet A as representing for the digit 10.
BC the up until FF represents the.
15 the value in the decimal system is 15.
So now. We are allowed to use this number.
All of these numbers are valid.
We can use the A as the valid numeral,
and if you want to see what is
the decimal number.
Very similar,
we multiply each digit to the
significance of the position in.
This system is based on the powers of 16.
An A can be multiplied because it's a
valid digit, but a has the value of.
9 + 1 unit, so 10.
So basically you are multiplying
10 by 16 to the power of 5.
And then, uh,
the other numbers are B is equal to 11 C,
12 D 13 and etc.
If we do this, uh, we can't represent A as.
10 we multiply 10 by 16 to the power of 5.
And then the result going to be
this huge number much more larger
than in the base tab.
This is the exact number, uh,
we calculated so far based on the
base two base, 8 decimal and etc.
And as you can see here the same
number in base-16 becomes larger.
So you see that why we introduced
the base 16 numbering system?
Because it gives us more powerful
compared to the decimal system.
We can represent large and large
numbers compared to the decimal system.
And if you want to count on base16,
so definitely the minimum number is
repeating the lowest digit, which is
0000. My question from you is
that what is the maximum number?
In base 16. So the largest digit is F,
so you have to repeat F in all positions,
so this is the largest Jennette correct?
And now you have you have to count.
Toward the maximum number.
So, and these are the valid numbers,
so 0123 up until 15.
And now when you want to go to the 16,
there is no digit for 16.
You did one round, so you go to the
next position and then you, uh,
start again to count from zero up until F.
And this is the same addition by 1 unit.
Imagine that you are given this number.
First you have to see that each digit
represents what a what value F represents.
1515 + 1 is 16. So you did one round.
You put it as you carry
it to the next position,
and you keep the remainder.
The next is that 1 + A,  A
is representing 10 + 0.
In total we're gonna have 1111 in base,
16 is equal to the alphabet B.
And then C + 0 is C and 5 + 0 is 5.
So this is the next number.
The next weird number is base 64.
So you see, that's the greed of
human individual that wants to
increase the power or increase the,
uh, representing very large numbers.
So 16 basically, as you can see,
they're gonna have.
They're gonna start from zero.
Up until the largest digit gonna be
sixty 3012 up until 63 because we
are in base 64 but interestingly.
This time the symbols that the
starts the lowest number up until the
largest digit or number is different.
And that's the convention.
Actually, this is a convention in 1992,
and this is the standard which is
used in transferring information.
Uh, in the online platforms?
Uh, it's called mime or MIME
This is standard for mail extension.
There are huge advances to this system,
but assuming that we have a base 64 as
the standard, these are the digits.
This time the lowest digit is A
So it's not zero anymore.
Be careful, so the lowest digit is A
The number that represent next Unit 1 is B.
The next number,
the three sorry two is C and etc.
And then, uh, basically they start
with capital alphabet and then a
small alphabets and then we have 0.
So in base 64 the digit 0.
Doesn't have the value zero.
It has the value, so after all the
capital letters and small letters.
So this is the look up table for
the values so. In the base 64,
zero digit has the value of 52.
Because you have to pass all
the capital and small letters.
And the value 9 has the value of 61.
The largest digit is forward Slash,
which represents 63.
You see how weird this system is?
And now. If you see this number.
And you want to see what is the actual
decimal number for this weird number.
In this 64 you have to look up the
actual value of each character,
multiply that with the 64 power
and then some them together.
So these are the significance
of position based on 64.
And then you have to look up
the actual value of each digit.
So these are the A has the value,
0H has the value capital H has the value 7.
The small a 26. The small d 29 and etc.
And then you have to multiply
the actual value with the powers
of 64 and sum them together.
And this is the as you can see here.
It's a very huge number.
If you want to count in base 64.
What is the lowest number?
That's a very tricky question.
You have to repeat the lowest digit, correct.
The lowest digit is a,
so you have to repeat a AA.
This is the lowest digit.
And what is the maximum number?
So this is the lowest digit?
The maximum number gonna
be the largest digit.
So which is forward Slash?
Yes, that's the largest number in this 64.
And here is the counting
toward the last number.
And again, if you want to see what
is the next number in the base 64,
you have to add a number by one.
But remember one in base 64 is this.
0001 in this system the
digits are different, so AAAB.
So you have to add base 64 numbers with  AAAB
And if you do that, so forwardslash,
for instance, is 64 + 1 becomes 64.
Sorry, 63 + 1  64.
You did one round. You bring one.
As a carry, but one in base 64,
the digits is B. So B + Z,
which is equal to 25, is 26 + A
which is 0 altogether becomes
2626 in base 64 is the character a.
And then there is no need.
You can simply represent
this 26 by the valid digit.
There is no need for carry.
So then. We have plus.
Plus A, so 62 + 0 becomes.
Plus and then a small a plus capital
A becomes a because capital A zero
is small a is 2626 is the result.
You see how weird this system is?
That's why base 64 is
not used for arithmetic.
Usually they are used for
converting text to some unique.
I mean to some it is used for coding,
not for arithmetic.
And another weird but interesting
numbering system was proposed by Christina,
one of the student class
in the discussion board,
and I really like that basically.
Christina I'd say he or she.
Sorry.
Are you in the class right now?
Oh great yeah. Nice to meet you so
she proposes this system. Basically.
She says that these are the numerals for me.
01234 and five.
And the logic is that the number of
vertices so we have one vertices here.
So this represents one.
We have two vertices we have.
This is the symbol for two and etc.
So the largest digit is 5
because it has five vertices.
And whenever you want to represent
a number in this system,
you have to simply a.
As you can see here,
the positions has the powers
of 6 because we have 5 digits.
Sorry, the maximum digit is up
until five and for instance 20.
Is equal to this number, so it means that.
This is the digits 3,
multiply by 6 to the power of 1 plus,
and this is representing 2.
So it becomes.
18 +2 becomes twenty.
That's an interesting idea, uh?
The way that you convert it to see what
is the actual value in decimal system.
But if you are given a decimal
system and you want to see what is
the number in the target base a,
we will see that hopefully today.
Otherwise next session.
How to convert the decimal
system to other bases?
And another weird,
but it's still interesting.
Number system is the
numbering system by Maya.
I mean civilization.
I put this in the discussion board.
You can read about that in the Wikipedia.
So, uh, they were living in the
southeastern part of Mexico.
Uh, and the idea was that their system
has these digits 01234 up until four,
they represented by dots,
and then when it reaches 5 it they represent
the digit by just a horizontal line.
And as you can see,
six is horizontal line plus a dot.
But this is considered as just.
One position, so as a single digit.
So up until nine,
and as you can see here,
the largest digit is 19.
So 19 is 5 + 5 + 5 + 4.
So, but they consider this as one position,
uh, as a result, it's a base 20 and
when they want to add a new position.
In our bases,
when we have one position
and we need another position,
we add the new position in the
left side with the significance
or to the power of for instance 1.
If R is 4 or 8 or etc.
so we add position to the left side,
but in their system they
add position vertically.
They add position on top of the.
Previous position,
so if you have one position then
next position gonna be here the
next position gonna be here.
So they vertically add the position.
As a result,
if you have the number 33 and
you want to see what is the
number in my numerals
So here is the number, so one.
Single dot represent one.
So this is 1 multiplied by the new
position based on the powers of two,
so 20 based on the power of
2020 to the power of 1 plus.
This number so this number,
as you can see here it's.
8.
So becomes 20 plus.
Am I right? 20 plus eights
something is wrong.
oh it has two. Gotcha gotcha yeah
it has 13 so one here one here.
Yes it has two horizontal lines so
13 so it's not eight, it's not 15.
So then it becomes 33, yeah?
That's the way that they measure the units.
So. But among all these common and
weird numbering system in this course,
we only consider a naming system
that we refer to as radix.
And this is the, uh,
showing the number of digits in that
number system radix-R or sometimes
we call them base-R numbering system.
So for instance, Hossein numbering system is
not considered as a radix numbering system,
because the positions doesn't have a
significance based on powers of a number.
So what is the main property
of radix-R numbering system?
Here is the math formula so a number
in radix-R. Is represented this way,
so we put a ( a subscript by the.
Based off the system. And.
If you want to see what is
the actual value in base 10,
here is the formula.
So each position has this significance
based on the powers of R
So if you have a system that the
position doesn't have a significance
or the significance is calculated
based on other math formula,
it's not a radix-R ,radix-R the
significance of the positions
are based on the powers of R
and increasing toward the left.
So the r position has the
significance of r to the  power of n - 1.
And each digit in each position
have to be multiplied by the
significance of that position.
And then sum them together.
If. The conversion of a
number in any basis to decimal
system follows this formula.
We call it radix numbering system.
And R is called radix.
These are the digits.
These are the weight or significance
of the position and this is the number
of positions or digits in number N.
What's one thing you have to be careful
that again, each digit should be
between the lowest digit zero or any a
symbol for the lowest digit up until.
The base number or the radix number
minus one, so up until r-1
you have to be careful about that.
Another thing is that the first position
has the significance to the power of 0.
So we start with zero up until n - 1.
We have to be careful that we're
starting from zero, we are.
Capital zero indices.
And the maximum.
So these are the minimum,
maximum and the unit of increment.
So the minimum number is
repeating the lowest digit 00 up
until in base 64 is repeating A.
The maximum number is repeating
the largest digit in the system.
And based on the formula that we calculated,
so it is equal to R to the power of n - 1.
So this is not in the power. This is in the.
So are to the power of n - 1.
In the decimal system and the unit
of increment the steps that we add
to the previous numbers is this.
One in the first position and zero
in all the other positions which
is equal to 1 in decimal system.
So we move forward one by one and
the one or the lowest unit is
represented in radix-R system like this.
So now I'm ready for your questions.
So I can.
Scroll the chat box to see
whether there is a question or.
Somebody said question about this
part or question or any question.
Any question about this topic?
Yeah about the topics that we covered so far.
I mean in these slides oh OK.
Viewpost see answer for your question in
the discussion board about the Maya system.
Ah. There are some discussion
about maya system there,
so you mean the correct answer.
You mean, yeah, because.
After this class I had been
even more confused about what's.
The answer is.
Uh, basically that that's just for,
I mean, uh, I mean open discussion,
so I will not give you the correct answer.
Uh, but a weekend.
I mean in the discussion board in you
can reply what you're thinking and
I can respond to your I mean post.
So I just wanted to leave that
as an open question so I won't
give you the right answer.
Uh, but we will we we can discuss
how to reach the correct answer.
Yeah, OK, thank you.
Any other questions?
So I, uh, one thing is that uh,
dema asked that, uh?
How to determine if the number is valid?
First you have to see that each digit of
the number is within the a valid numeral,
in that system or not.
If you are in the radix R system,
the digits should be between
zero up until r - 1.
If it is in another numbering system
which is not a radix or you have
to check what are the valid digits,
that's the only way that you can see
whether the number is valid or not.
Uh, I hope.
OK so I see no other questions.
So. The next item is that.
Now we know how to measure
discrete units.
What happens if we have?
Some part of an entity or unit.
Back to our example,
we calculate the distance of moon to
the sun based on the units of Earth.
But uh, we roughly said that
if we are in base 10, it is
12345. But uh, or if you are in the
uh, base two system, it is, uh, it is.
So here is 0. If so, let's count on base.
2. So if you are in base two,
we are zero and then we go one and
then we have to represent 2, so 2
is 1 0, 3 is 1 1 and then 4 is.
100 we need a new position and
then five is 101, so this is the
representation is 2. In base.
Uh, I don't know, for instance 6 it would be
012345 because all can be considered
up until 6 - 1 we can count.
If you are in base interest, you can.
About base three so 012.
You cannot represent 3/3 is 1
zero and then four and then five.
So these are all in base 3.
But the question here is that what the
exact or precise distance is 4 unit of Earth
in decimal system plus half of the earth.
How can we represent half of a
unit in other numbering system?
We already know that in decimal
system we put a fraction point and
then we say that just half of a unit.
But, uh. What is the algorithm?
How the human individual created
this fraction of a unit?
So that's the topic.
How to produce fraction of a unit
in numbering system?
So the idea here is very simple
if we have if we can represent
one unit in numbering system.
For instance if we have one earth.
We can divide earth in 4 sub-parts
If you are in base 4.
And then one part of four subparts
can be represented as one.
Out of 4 division so 1 / 4.
1 / 4 in math is equal to 4 to
the power of minus one and then
in order to show this one subpart
out of four subpart that that
Form 1 unit can be represented.
By this we say that by contract
or by convention we say that we
put a symbol which is not a digit,
it just wants to separate the
actual units and the subpart units.
And then we start to the other direction
to put the fraction fraction units.
So we put fraction point and then
we say that just one part out
of four parts of a whole unit.
If you have two, we say that 2.
Subparts out of four subparts so
it becomes two of its subparts,
so, 2 multiply by this so it becomes two.
So you see here we count not in the left
side but in the right side of a symbol
which we refer to as fraction point.
3 becomes three of that subpart unit,
so it becomes three.
So you see that this position in the
right side of the fraction point
has the significance of powers of
four but negative powers of four.
So this position has the significance 1
/ 4 or 4 to the power one and three of
that support is 3 multiplied by this.
And then the four subunit
out of four is whole unit.
So we come one. Or 4 multiplied by.
Each subpart, so 4 * 1 / 4 is 1.
So now we can say that if
you are in base 4101, so 0.
4123 the next number is 4. 4 can
be represented by 10 in Base 4.
And then we need 2 subparts.
These two subparts is
means that 2 multiply by.
1 / 4 so we put a fraction point here
and we say that we need 2 units,
but two subpart units.
So this becomes the. Fraction,
or more precise number in base 4.
10 whole unit or four
whole unit. +2 subunits.
If you need more precision.
We can divide.
One of the subparts into four
sub sub parts so we might 1 / 4.
Into another 4 subsections,
so 1 / 4 / 4 is equal to 1.
Divided by 16.
Or 4 to the power of minus 2.
Which means that we can have two
positions in the right side.
The first position has the significance
4 to the power of minus one,
the second position for the power of minus 2.
And then we need only one unit.
This represents this sub subunit.
And then two of that and then three of that,
and then four of sub subparts
which becomes one subpart.
And this way you can add more and more
precision to a numbering system just by
dividing one unit to support and then
that subpart to sub subpart and etc.
In base four, we divide by 4.
So now if you want to have more
precision so you have four whole units.
Precision or fraction .2?
Subparts and then one sub subparts?
And if you want to represent it in a system,
usually in numbering system,
we don't waste a position for
the fraction point, so we don't
care about this fraction point.
We can say that. The first
five position is just for fraction numbers.
All the remaining positions are for the.
Integer part of the numbers or
whole units part of the number.
So this way we don't waste any
position for fraction point
because it doesn't have any value,
it just separates the positions.
And if you are given,
for instance, this number.
This is the integer part and
the fraction part. Again,
we don't waste anything for fraction point.
We if we want to see what is
the actual decimal number.
Very similar algorithm or steps
you multiply each digit to the
significance of that position.
In the integer part,
the significance are to the
power positive powers of four.
So 140 power of 00 to the power
of 140 power of 1 and etc.
For the fraction part,
you multiply to the powers of four,
but negative powers of four.
And then sum each part separately
so the integer part sums becomes
this the fraction part becomes this.
And this becomes the decimal value for this
number in base 4 having fraction point.
And here is the math formula.
So this is for your reference.
I wouldn't suggest you to
memorize this formula so I.
I'm more interested.
In figuring out the logic of
creating fraction points and
how to create a fraction point,
but at the end of the day you
can prove that this is the
math formula for any number.
In base are radix-r given.
We are allowed to have fractions.
You have a fraction point.
All the digits in the left side
have to multiply to the powers
of positive powers of four.
And then all the right side to
the negative powers of that base.
Or that, uh, I mean radix number R.
Here in the right side,
if you have m position.
The last position gonna have the
value R to the power of minus M.
In the left side,
the last position gonna have
the significance of part of
the positive n minus A
If you are given N
position n minus one.
Uh, one thing is that.
The number of positions for
fraction point fraction parts and
the integer part may not be equal,
so that's why we use different variables.
And represent the numbers in for
integer part and for the fraction part,
so they may not be equal.
It depends on the way
you split the positions.
But the most important part is here.
What is the minimum value given we
are allowed to put fraction parts?
So, assuming that this is the fraction point,
again very similar.
You repeat the lowest digit in all
positions to the integer part in
all positions to the fraction part,
so you're gonna end up 0.0.
In decimal system.
The maximum number is again the same.
You will repeat the largest digit in
all positions to the integer part the
same in the fraction part you repeat
the largest digit in the fraction part.
If you do this and you do the math
calculation based on the previous
formula based on this formula.
In the left side you will
see R to the power of n - 1.
We already saw that,
but what would be the largest fraction point?
I left this as a lecture assignment
in the lecture assignment.
You can this is a math formula, a problem.
You have to simply multiply.
This number by the r to
the power of M Plus.
R - 1 * R to the power of minus.
M - 1 and etc and then sum them together.
So there is a math formula for summing Siri.
And this is a lecture assignment.
Another interesting thing here is this.
What is the smallest unit of increment?
Now that we can represent fraction part.
Is it possible to move forward with less?
I mean with sub part or sub sub parts instead
of just having the whole unit or whole part.
So the answer is yes, and the minimum
unit of increment is basically is this.
In the integer part,
you put the lowest number,
so in the integer part you have 0.
But in the fraction part,
the lowest number gonna be all
the these positions are zero,
but the last position in the
rightmost position you have one.
So basically it represent one
multiply by 1 divided by.
r to the power of m.
Which is equal to r.
To the power of minus.
This is the lowest a unit or the
smallest unit that you can move forward.
So. Let's practice and I mean I mean.
Have a better understanding
of this math formula.
Assume that we are in base two, radix-2
and we are allowed to have fraction parts.
Assume that we have seven positions.
We allocate 4 positions to the integer part
and three positions the fraction part.
So this way, and we don't waste
any position for fraction point.
So no position for this.
So in the right side,
these are the significance of the
position 2 to the power of 1 - 1 or 0.5.
2 to the power of minus,
2 to the power of minus,
three in the left side.
Positive powers of two.
This is the lowest number,
so put zero in all positions
so it becomes 0.0,
which is 0 in decimal system.
The next unit is that you
add this number with one,
but what is the lowest increment
or smallest unit of increment is?
Basically here is the smallest unit.
You just gradually or very I mean.
In a small square you want to go ahead.
So you represent zero in all integer part
in the fraction part you just increment the.
Lowest significant position by 1.
So now you have 1 multiplied by.
2 to the power minus three,
which is 1 / 8 and this is the next number.
In decimal system.
Then you add 1 unit,
but they want sorry one step but
the low smallest step gonna be.
0000.001 this is the smallest
unit you have to add this with
the this number with this number.
And you have to do the addition,
so becomes 2. And then
10.0000. So this is the.
sec...,  Next number.
Which is basically 1 * 2 to the
power of minus 2. And 1 / 4.
Which is this number so you see,
if you are given eight
position 3 just four fraction,
these are the measurements
0, 0.125 and then 0.25 and then
this is the next number and
this is the next number and etc.
So now the question is that what is
the Max in this system? The Max is
that you put one in all positions.
And if you want to convert
it to the radix, you have to
multiply these ones with the.
Significance of the position
and sum them together.
And this is the largest number
in decimal system, so one
multiply by 2 to the power of 3.
1 * - 2. Minus one. And then
20212223 and then sum them together.
But the next question is very
important and very interesting.
Is it possible to represent
this number in decimal system?
But in the base 2.
We have the number 1.02 in decimal
system and we want to convert
it to radix 2. Is it possible?
Anybody?
So James say yes, ahmad says yes,
yiran says no. Christine says no,
because the smallest unit is 0.125.
So there is.
There are some students that say no,
there are some students that say yes,
so let's see the answer.
As are those that says, no.
The reason is that as you can see here,
the level of increment is by this number.
This is the smallest unit of increment.
So the next number is this and etc.
So if you come to the one
which is this number.
0001 and all the zero in the fraction part,
then next number is this number because.
You have to add this number to.
So basically if we have. 1.
In base two and the next.
Units are gonna be adding with the
smallest level of increment, which is 001.
So the next number is 0 + 1 is 100
fraction point. So it's gonna be
00000, so this is the smallest unit.
Added by one which becomes this number.
This number in base two,
and this is the decimal number.
But this number is between these two numbers.
You can see that in the base two
given eight position but three
position only for fraction part
we are not able to represent this
number because right after one
the next number gonna be 1.125.
So the answer is no, because the
smallest unit of increment is this.
So what's the solution?
The solution would be.
Giving more position because if
we are given more position here.
We gonna have two to the power of
minus four and then more position
2 to the power of minus 5.
And then if we.
Have more fraction position.
Then we can sorry.
It can't have units that are
much more smaller because adding
position to the right side,
meaning that dividing the
subpart into sub sub parts.
So if you have 1 / 8. Here.
Because 2 to the power of 3.
Then we divided this by another two
because we are in the base two,
so this position is.
1 / 2 to the power of 4 or 1 / 16 more
precise and then this position is.
1 / 2 to the power of 5 or.
1 / 32 which if you calculate this division,
it is more precision in the decimal system.
So. If we add more position.
We can have more more position to write.
We can have more precision,
but the question is that how many
position we need to represent?
This number. In the base 2.
So I leave it as a practice to
add more position to the right.
And see whether still you're able to
represent this number in the base 2.
The idea is that you have to
give away that the smallest
unit of increment would be 0.2.
Or you can say that more smaller point
with smaller unit would be 0.01.
If you can create the smallest unit as this,
then you can represent this number.
But another solution would be assuming that
we are not allowed to add more position.
We are fixed in terms of the
number of positions we are.
We only have eight position.
This solution would be
this accepting some errors.
Instead, finding the closest number as
the representative for this number.
So in the base two system.
If you want to represent this
number .2 closest number.
This number, which represents 1.
And this number,
which represents one point.
uh, 125 so if if we use this number in base
two as a representative for the given number.
Then the error would be you have to
convert it to the decimal system.
You are representing one in decimal
system instead of just 1.02.
So the error gonna be this
amount in decimal system.
So this is again in decimal system.
If you select the next number
in base two this number.
The large among the largest numbers,
the minimum one.
So then you are representing this in
decimal system and the error would
be you have to subtract this number
from this number and the error of
your representation would be this.
Which one is lower?
So definitely this one is has
a lower error or noise.
Uh, then you can represent this number.
Assuming that you have limitation
in fraction point,
you simply drop this and you
represent it at this number in base 2.
So. You can practice by using
the radix four base 4 system.
And you see that what is the minimum number?
What is the smallest unit of increment
and what is the largest number?
As you can see in this slide.
So this is the minimum number.
This is the smallest unit of increment.
Each time you add this value.
Step by step.
And then the largest unit is this.
By having three fraction point,
you can add this number to
the maximum integer number.
Repeating the largest digit
in all positions in base 4.
But again, you can repeat the same question.
Is it possible to represent
this number in decimal system?
In the base 4. Which have only three
positions in the fraction part.
So. The answer is no.
I leave the reason for you to
figure out why we cannot represent
this number in base four and.
Explore two solutions.
How many positions you can add
to the right side to make it
possible to represent this?
Or what is the closest number for
this and accept some level of error?
For instance, if you want
to accept level of error,
the closest numbers to the given
number would be these two numbers.
This is the largest a.
This is within all the smaller number.
This is the largest number and this
one within all the largest number.
This is the smallest number.
So between these two number you have
to choose which one gonna represent
it for represent this number.
And if you calculate the error.
This number would be a better
choice for the given number.
You can practice on other radiuses.
How? What is the smallest
unit of movement and?
Uh, what are the degree of error when
you want to represent a real number
a number in with fraction in decimal
to the base eight base 16 or etc?
So the next topic that we are
going to cover next seven,
I mean next class is about conversion.
So far we could simply convert to
decimal system, but the question is
that how to convert back if we are
given a number in decimal system?
How we can represent it in a new system?
By having an algorithm.
Or a step by step?
Algorithm to figure out what is the
number in the target rating system.
So now I'm ready for your questions.
I will upload the lecture
slides in the blackboard,
so let me show you the exact position
in the left side. If you see the.
If you click on the lecture you can see
for each week we have a folder and in
each folder I will put a URL for the slides.
For instance, for the first week.
Here is the URL for the recording for the.
Tuesday and then Thursday,
so the same gonna be for this week.
I will upload it the slides or one thing.
This recording.
Also if you look at the attached file,
these are the slides.
So in the attachment I put these slides.
Yeah.
And if there is any other helpful resources,
I will put the files as an attachment.
So see,
I mean check this folder,
the lecture 2.
Anything else, all labs marked attendance
no the attendance in this course.
Any part of the course,
even the class labs is not mandatory.
Uh, but it is highly recommended
for you to attend the labs and
lab sections and the class. Uh.
So the attendance doesn't have any mark.
But in the in the labs lab sections, the lab
instruction is going to help you how to.
Write a code how to figure out the solution
but they don't give you the final answer,
but they help you to find how
to reach the final answer.
OK, have a great day guys and thank you for
coming, uh, will there be any lab today?
Yes, the lab is started today so.
I think in the first lab is 1130,
they're gonna.
It's gonna start, I mean 5 minutes.
Yeah, uh, they're gonna start from today,
so this week they're gonna help you.
How to install an environment
to do coding in C language?
So also you can ask them to how
to solve the lecture assignments.
So thank you Taha, thank you, Karen.
Deep when are your office hours?
11:30 so right after the class?
Uh, I'm going to be in this link
in this office.
So if you click on this here you
can see the two links are enabled.
So I will be in the office now and then.
These are the lab section 51 by.
Started at 11:30.
You can attend the lab section.
While using this link.
So this is for the lab and this
is for my office.
Have a great day so can the
lectures be in Word format? Uhm no.
What do you mean by word format?
I'm I'm not sure I understand this. you mean
converting the PowerPoint to word format.
Oh oh, the lecture assignments, uh?
You mean you cannot open the PDF file?
Uh, let me see, uh?
So I think it's good for you to install PDF.
Excuse me, can you hear me?
Oh yes, I was asking for the answers.
Can I submit them in a word format?
or PDF. Let me see what is the no.
It says PDF OK. So you can.
You can convert it online.
There are some online tools so online PDF.
Oh, there it is.
Honestly, I use it first.
I mean, personally I use the online version
so there are online versions that you can
simply just convert your work with PDF.
Yeah, OK, thank you very much
and it is for free, yeah?
Thank you, have a great day.
You too take care.
Take care.
We should just be able to write
it in Word and save it as.
Oh that's another thing, yeah, right?
Thank you cecelia. yes
in Word you can save it as a PDF file.
So let me open it.
So if you have a word.
Application so here you can simply.
Assuming that I have that
is open this manual.
So you can save as here
you can select PDF. Yeah.
You can save it as a PDF.
Or if you write it in a paper,
you can take it photo of that
and then convert it to PDF.
Nafiz says that can we
do the assignment on paper
and then yes yes correct now.
Yes, you can write your answers
in a piece of paper by pen.
Take a photo and then convert
it to PDF you want.
Yes, we can do that.
And.
OK, I'll be in the office and
waiting for your question.
And. I have to ask you to
leave the class so that I can.
Close the virtual door. You too, huh?